Since custom properties
are inherited properties,
they also inherit down
shadow DOM boundaries, and
they're not affected by any potential
old-based resets, like the old CSS
property that lets you reset any
property in CSS just in one declaration.
Custom properties are not
affected by that.
Users of web components
cannot directly style them.
That's the whole point of
encapsulation of web components.
But custom properties can
provide style hooks for
customizing aspects of the component.
So let's look at an example.
Here, I'm using the Shoelace
library of web components.
In fact,
the website is called Shoelace Style,
if you wanna look at them,
they're quite beautiful.
So here I'm using this
image-comparer web component.
It allows you to specify two images and
slide this thing to compare them.
And shoelace already supports
certain CSS variables for
customizing each of their web components.
Let's look at the Shoelace website.
So, the image comparer is here and
you can see there's a CSS custom property
section that tells you which custom
properties are accepted for styling.
This is only the beginning of
people using custom properties
to customize their components, and
I'm really glad that Shoelace is doing it.
Not all web components libraries
have started doing this.
So they expose two properties,
divider-width and handle-size.
So remember in the past when
you were using someone's code,
if you wanted to customize a part of
its styling, you had to drill down and
inspect, see how they've
implemented things, override rules.
With custom properties,
component authors can just tell you,
these are the properties you can set and
take care of applying them
inside the component.
So for example, I can set these and
you can see the result.
I can set the handle size, and
the component just takes
care of adapting its style.
And of course, you can do the same
thing in your own components.
Even as consumers of components though,
even when we're using components that
someone else made, we can create our own
obstructions through custom properties.
So here is the same
image-comparer component.
And this component also exposes two parts,
if we wanna do more
heavyweight CSS customization,
it exposes the divider in the handler
CSS elements that we can style.
And if we go back to
the documentation of Shoelace,
we can see right under the Custom Property
section, it lists which parts it exposes.
In case you haven't seen CSS parts before,
they are this API that lets you
expose specific elements from inside
your web components shadow DOM so
that consumers of your component
can style them as regular elements.
So that you don't have to expose
your entire structure in light DOM,
only those specific elements
you want to expose.
So here we wanted to make
a higher level abstraction so
that people can color the entire
divider and handle together.
Of course we could do that by styling both
parts, but it means we need to use these
pseudo element selectors and
we wanted to make it easier.
So we could actually have a separate rule,
That sets a higher level
divider color property.
Let's set it to skyblue for now and
then just use the property.
And now we only need to include
this in one part of our CSS and
everywhere else where
we're using the component,
we just use divider color in the main
rule that styles the main element.
And we don't need to worry
about which parts are which and
which parts we need to style and
how, we just set this one property.
And obviously you might be thinking,
why would we need to have multiple
image-comparer components,
but this is just an example.
The point that this makes applies
to any kind of component.
And of course a similar point applies
to native components as well.
So here we have a progress bar.
And we're using these vendor
prefixed pseudo elements to style it
because we wanted to make it purple.
But if we have many progress
elements in our websites,
we don't wanna be using vendor prefixed
pseudo elements all over the place.
It's kind of an anti-pattern.
We wanna keep them in one place so
that when we get a more standardized
version of this code,
we can just replace it in one fell swoop,
not have to hunt it down
in multiple places.
So for these cases, it also makes sense
to define a higher level property.
Like for example, bar color.
Let's make it gold.
And then we use it in
those pseudo elements and
we never have to use the pseudo
elements anywhere else.
Actually let's make it a bit darker,
let's make it orange,
slightly darker,
yeah it's more of a brown.
Anyway let's say we wanted
to make it this weird brown.
And now this means that anywhere
where we have a progress element,
we can customize it by just
using this one property,
even in the inline style if we wanted to.
So another thing to remember is that
custom properties can also help
us abstract away ugly parts of our
CSS that we don't want to repeat
in multiple places.
So it's good to remember that custom
properties inherit down shadow DOM
boundaries.
This was actually one of the very explicit
goals when we designed custom properties.
They were designed to afford components
to expose styling hooks so that consumers
of components can style them without
having to break encapsulation.